Spec: Update row lineage requirements for upgrading tables (#12781)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

This example demonstrates how `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` are assigned for a snapshot. This starts with a table with a `next-row-id` of 1000.

> Writing a new append snapshot creates snapshot metadata with `first-row-id` assigned to the table's `next-row-id`:

Reviewer: Is this limited to `append`? I would think any snapshot (including rewrite) should assign ids.

The `first_row_id` of the EXISTING file `data1` was already assigned, so the file metadata was copied into manifest `added1`.

> Files `data2` and `data3` are written with `null` for `first_row_id` and are assigned `first_row_id` at read time based on the manifest's `first_row_id` and the `record_count` of previously files without `first_row_id` in this manifest: (1,000 + 0) and (1,000 + 50).

Author: Typo: "previously" -> "previous"

The snapshot then populates the total number of `added-rows` based on the sum of all added rows in the manifests: 100 (50 + 50)

When the new snapshot is committed, the table's `next-row-id` must also be updated (even if the new snapshot is not in the main branch). Because 375 rows were in data files in manifests that were assigned a `first_row_id` (`added1` 100+25, `added2` 0+100, `added3` 125+25) the new value is 1,000 + 375 = 1,375.

##### Row Lineage for Upgraded Tables 

When a table is upgraded to v3, existing snapshots are not modified and do not have `first-row-id` set. For such snapshots without `first-row-id`, `first_row_id` values for data files and data manifests are null, and values for `_row_id` are read as null for all rows. When `first_row_id` is null, inherited row ID values are also null.

Snapshots that are created after upgrading to v3 must set the snapshot's `first-row-id` and assign row IDs to existing and added files in the snapshot. When writing the manifest list, all data manifests must be assigned a `first_row_id`, which assigns a `first_row_id` to all data files via inheritance.

Note that:

> * Snapshots from before upgrading to v3 do not have row IDs.

Reviewer 2: So does this mean that we aren't going to do any work on upgrade to assign new row Id's to existing snapshots? We'll only do this on the creation of future snapshots created after the upgrade?

I feel like we can handle this now by just setting next-row-id on all snapshots using the logic below. Then all previous snapshots can get row_id

Reviewer 3: I think how existing snapshots are handled can probably can be left up to implementations? But I agree that in the reference implementation it makes more sense to just do it on upgrade

Reviewer 2: I think that's fine, I realize that actually adding post-facto row lineage does require a manifest list rewrite for past snapshots in order to differentiate between existing and added manifests

Author: Yes, I don't think that we should add row lineage for older snapshots because it creates a lot of problems that we don't have good ways to solve and doesn't create much, if any, value.

Here are some of the problems:
* To add row IDs to older snapshots, we would need to change the snapshot metadata. This could be cached so changing it may cause strange issues, but the larger problem is that modifying it would require coordination (to avoid losing the changes) and changes to the REST protocol to replace an older snapshot
* If we were to add row IDs to older snapshots, then those row IDs would not be very useful without an expensive operation that rewrites the whole metadata tree.
    * If we assigned new row IDs independently in each snapshot, then a data file would have different row IDs across versions -- making the IDs useless.
    * That means we would need to track data files and update the metadata tree with consistent `first_row_id` values.
    * Even with the expensive rewrite of the whole metadata tree, the `_row_id` column would be missing from data files so the lineage of individual rows is not available.

I think the best approach is to not modify older snapshots. The goal with this update is to ensure that we have good row lineage from the next snapshot after upgrade and forward, when we can write `_row_id`. That's why I updated the `first_row_id` assignment to include any unassigned data file or data manifest, and changed the assignment strategy to leave space for existing rows. With those changes we have created an invariant: new snapshots in v3 tables always have IDs assigned to all rows.

Branching is still a little difficult because we don't want to analyze branch history (which may be lost) and attempt to assign consistently. With this update, branches get separate IDs but it leave open the possibility to do some external analysis and assign the same IDs for the same data files.

Author: I replied here before I saw a comment on the implementation PR that was similar. Here's the link to my response there: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/12672#discussion_r2043087323

I think I summarized the issues better on that one:

> I think the argument against filling in historical row IDs is that it is extra work to think through the issues and build an algorithm to modify old data. And when we've done that extra work, we don't actually gain anything: you still can't reason about the IDs of records between branches or even within a branch.
>
> My conclusion is that we should just expose the data that we know, which is that the row ID was null until the row was assigned an ID in a branch.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the detailed explanation, yeah I'm convinced now that rewriting the older snapshots adds questionable value at the cost of a lot of complexity.

The `first_row_id` of the EXISTING file `data1` was already assigned, so the file metadata was copied into manifest `added1`.

Files `data2` and `data3` are written with `null` for `first_row_id` and are assigned `first_row_id` at read time based on the manifest's `first_row_id` and the `record_count` of previous files without `first_row_id` in this manifest: (1,000 + 0) and (1,000 + 50).

The snapshot then populates the total number of `added-rows` based on the sum of all added rows in the manifests: 100 (50 + 50)

> When the new snapshot is committed, the table's `next-row-id` must also be updated (even if the new snapshot is not in the main branch). Because 375 rows were in data files in manifests that were assigned a `first_row_id` (`added1` 100+25, `added2` 0+100, `added3` 125+25) the new value is 1,000 + 375 = 1,375.

Reviewer 2: Nit, but we have spaces before and after + in all the other examples

##### Row Lineage for Upgraded Tables 

When a table is upgraded to v3, its `next-row-id` is initailized to 0 and existing snapshots are not modified (that is, `first-row-id` remains unset or null). For such snapshots without `first-row-id`, `first_row_id` values for data files and data manifests are null, and values for `_row_id` are read as null for all rows. When `first_row_id` is null, inherited row ID values are also null.

Snapshots that are created after upgrading to v3 must set the snapshot's `first-row-id` and assign row IDs to existing and added files in the snapshot. When writing the manifest list, all data manifests must be assigned a `first_row_id`, which assigns a `first_row_id` to all data files via inheritance.

Note that:

> * Snapshots created before upgrading to v3 do not have row IDs.

Reviewer 2: I think we should add a note that, when reading from these snapshots all rows should return `null` (without inheritance as their value for "row_id" or "_last_updated_sequence_number"

Author: I think I did above in the first paragraph because it is part of the specification rather than a consequence of the rules:

> For such snapshots without `first-row-id`, `first_row_id` values for data files and data manifests are null, and values for `_row_id` are read as null for all rows. When `first_row_id` is null, inherited row ID values are also null.

Reviewer 2: I think we've had some confusion here (at least amongst folks I've talked to) about when "reading as null" and "reading null as something else".

> * After upgrading, new snapshots in different branches will assign disjoint ID ranges to existing data files, based on the table's `next-row-id` when the snapshot is committed. For a data file in multiple branches, a writer may write the `first_row_id` from another branch or may assign a new `first_row_id` to the data file (to avoid large metadata rewrites).

Reviewer 4: if i understand, this means if same data file exists on different branch, can have same first_row_id?  It seems the two sentence contradict (first sentence specifies disjoint Id ranges).  Would it be more clear:

> After upgrading, new snapshots in different branches will assign disjoint ID ranges to existing **distinct** data files, based on the table's `next-row-id` when the snapshot is committed. For the **same** data file in multiple branches...

Reviewer 2: During upgrade it is possible that an existing row can exist on two different branches with different row ids, after upgrade this will not be possible for new rows.

Author: What this is saying is that when another branch is updated, all of the files in that branch must be assigned IDs by the v3 snapshot, and unless the writer does some additional work to find and write the row IDs for the same data file in other branches, the IDs will be assigned for the branch.

This also says (the last sentence) that the writer can choose to do that extra work, find the `first_row_id` used in another branch for the file, and use it to have consistent IDs across the branches. This is optional.

Reviewer 4: I think makes sense.  I still read the two sentence as contradict (as the first sentence specifies 'disjoint', but second sentence says we can optionally re-use the other branch first_row_id), hence my suggestion if it makes sense

When adding a new data file, its `first_row_id` field is set to `null` because it is not assigned until the snapshot is successfully committed.

When reading, the `first_row_id` is assigned by replacing `null` with the manifest's `first_row_id` plus the sum of `record_count` for all data files that preceded the file in the manifest that had a null `first_row_id`.

The inherited value of `first_row_id` must be written into the data file metadata when creating existing and deleted entries. The value of `first_row_id` for delete files is always `null`.

> In most cases, only added files will be assigned a new `first_row_id` via inheritance, but any unassigned `first_row_id` must be assigned to handle manifests in upgraded tables that have not yet assigned `first_row_id` for existing entries.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a little difficult, I think there is a redundancy which is making a it a little confusing with "any unassigned ... that have not yet assigned"

Maybe we can shorten this to.:
```suggestion
Inheritance of `first_row_id` usually only applies to newly added files but during table format version upgrades existing files will also have a null value for `first_row_id` and must also be assigned via inheritance.
```
?

Author: I updated this to:

> Any null (unassigned) `first_row_id` must be assigned via inheritance, even if the data file is existing. This ensures that row IDs are assigned to existing data files in upgraded tables in the first commit after upgrading to v3.

There's no need to talk about "usually" and make assumptions.

#### Snapshot Row IDs

> A snapshot's `first-row-id` is assigned to the table's current `next-row-id` on each commit attempt. If a commit is retried, the `first-row-id` must be reassigned based on the table's current `next-row-id`. The `first-row-id` field is required even if a commit does not assign any ID space.

Author: Always writing `first-row-id` distinguishes snapshots that added 0 rows from pre-v3 snapshots.

> A snapshot's `first-row-id` is assigned to the table's current `next-row-id` on each commit attempt. If a commit is retried, the `first-row-id` must be reassigned based on the table's current `next-row-id`. The `first-row-id` field is required even if a commit does not assign any ID space.

Reviewer 4: Note: this seems a good clarification, if i understand this correctly, the next-row-id could be the same even on the next attempt, before it seemed like it implied it needed to be different.

The snapshot's `first-row-id` is the starting `first_row_id` assigned to manifests in the snapshot's manifest list.

> The snapshot's `added-rows` is the sum of all the  [`added_rows_count`](#manifest-lists) in all added manifests.

Author: @RussellSpitzer, I've removed `added-rows` because I think that it is misleading and makes row ID range assignment more complicated.

In this PR, row ID range assignment is based on the total number of existing or added rows in new manifests. That leaves room for any data files that are missing `first_row_id` even if the files are `existing` and not `added`. That may not be the total number of added rows so I don't think it makes sense to have `added-rows` in the snapshot.

Reviewer 2: That's fine, we only had this added in order to pass the information from the snapshot into the table metadata. I believe now that logic has moved we don't have that issue.

#### First Row ID Assignment

> When adding a new data manifest file, its `first_row_id` field is assigned the value of the snapshot's `first_row_id` plus the sum of `added_rows_count` and `existing_rows_count` for all data manifests that preceded the manifest in the manifest list and were assigned a `first_row_id`.

Reviewer 2: About you said "had a null ..." and i think that's a little bit clearer than "were assigned a"

Author: Updated, but this is a bit tricky because these are simply new manifests. Having a null `first_row_id` is an implementation detail that is not written into metadata. I've updated it to say both:

> When adding a new data manifest file, its `first_row_id` field is assigned the value of the snapshot's `first_row_id` plus the sum of `added_rows_count` and `existing_rows_count` for all new data manifests that preceded it in the manifest list; that is, those that had a null `first_row_id` and were assigned one.

I also reforamtted this secitn a little.

> The `first_row_id` is only assigned for data manifests that do not have a non-null `first_row_id`. Values for existing manifests must be preserved when writing a new manifest list. The value of `first_row_id` for delete manifests is always `null`.

Author: I updated this to be more clear:

> The `first_row_id` is only assigned for new data manifests that do not have a `first_row_id`.

That avoids assuming null because null isn't written for those manifests.

#### First Row ID Assignment

The `first_row_id` for existing manifests must be preserved when writing a new manifest list. The value of `first_row_id` for delete manifests is always `null`. The `first_row_id` is only assigned for data manifests that do not have a `first_row_id`. Assignment must account for data files that will be assigned `first_row_id` values when the manifest is read.

> The first manifest without a `first_row_id` is assigned a value that is greater than or equal to the `first_row_id` of the snapshot. Subsequent manifests without a `first_row_id` are assigned one based on the previous manifest to be assigned a `first_row_id`. Each assigned `first_row_id` must increase by the row count of all files that will be assigned a `first_row_id` via inheritance in the last assigned manifest. That is, each `first_row_id` must be greater than or equal to the last assigned `first_row_id` plus the total record count of data files with a null `first_row_id` in the last assigned manifest.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think the Last sentence is clear, but the second sentence just sounds more complicated to me. I'm fine with this as is though, i think the examples make this clear
